This time, about 7.
19.41.
A date which will live in infamous.
We're up in broadcast, bringing us in parking lots
and running the United States.
Last, Washington.
Nobody knows that this Japanese attack won for a long time.
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Terbivill.
Leroy Balmain was in boot camp at Catalina Island
when the atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki
in August of 1945.
As a merchant marine, and later in the Air Force,
he did not see combat duty, but served his country first
as a fireman aboard the SS Alfred C. Troupe,
and then eventually as an administrative supervisor.
He and his wife, Marito, were married in 1946,
and his assignments took them from Alaska to Topeca
to Alabama to Washington, D.C.
to Shreveport to the Philippines,
and finally back to the States,
and in 1972 to Bryan,
where he served four years as an Air Force recruiter.
After he retired from the service,
he spent 19 years as executive director
for the Better Business Bureau here.
So you see his entire adult life has been one of service.
So please welcome, Leroy Balmain,
and Leroy Balmain to veterans of the Valley.
Leroy, thank you for being here.
Thank you first for your service.
I appreciate your service and your long duty in the Air Force.
I know it was an interesting time and interesting time in your life,
and obviously one that you're proud of, right?
I am most proud of the service that I have given to our country
and to our local community.
Exactly.
It gives you a good warm feeling, you know,
to do something like that.
Right, right. Well, you know,
kids growing up and then graduating from high school
in the 40s and around the war and all,
and that's what they did.
There was an era of patriotism that went through everybody back then.
Many of my friends, that's what caused me to
want to go into the military as young as I was.
Everybody else was going,
and I thought I needed to go
and help do what I could do.
And then that's the reason why I went in at the age of 17.
In 1945, and you entered the merchant Marines.
I believe you might be the first veteran that I've had on
that I know of that was in the merchant Marines.
Talk about that and why you went that route initially.
Okay. I wanted to go into the service,
but my parents would not sign the papers for me to go.
So I finally came up with the merchant Marines
and they were convinced in that they would go ahead
and sign the papers.
And I entered the merchant Marines.
Indeed. And like I said in the beginning,
you were at Catalina Island in boot camp actually
when the hostilities ended with the dropping of the bomb
in August of 1945.
So that kind of, I guess,
changed your direction as far as what you were going to be doing.
Well, yes, I was already obligated to serve in the merchant Marines
when the bomb was dropped.
So I was at Catalina Island receiving my boot training.
And from there, I left and went to Japan.
Right. Right.
The ship that I was on left St. Pedro, California.
And went down through the Panama Canal up to New Orleans.
And we loaded the ship with supplies
that the military would need over there.
Tanks and trucks and grocerystie,
so forth like that.
So we left New Orleans and went to
down through the Panama Canal again.
And in 49 days later, we arrived in Japan.
49 days. That's quite a trip.
Quite a roundabout way to get from California to Japan.
Those are New Orleans.
So ships wouldn't made the go very fast.
Now, I stated that your job was as a fireman.
That's not the traditional description of the word fireman.
You kept the boilers going and kept the ship going the right direction.
We kept the steam up to the maximum.
So the ship would go as fast as it could.
And my job was to make sure that everything was okay in the engine room.
Right. So that was my job.
That was your job.
And this whole experience was quite a deal for a young kid from Hooks, Texas,
who'd never even seen the water before.
I mean, there was more water out there than I thought.
You got an idea there was a lot of them.
Yeah, I had an idea that they was something there, but I didn't realize they were so much.
You know, because being the first time I'd seen the ocean.
Right. Right.
Now, this was the Alfred C. True was the ship that you were on.
That was a merchant vessel.
Right.
I tried to find a picture of the Alfred C. True, but I couldn't find a picture of it.
I think you said it's...
It was decommissioned and then sold for salvage.
So it may be something else now.
So that's a lot.
It's probably scattered out everywhere by now.
The ship, though, had a duty in Japan.
And when you all got there, talk about when you got there.
We arrived in Yokohama, Japan, and then went on down to a place, the name of Curry,
T-U-R-E, Japan, is where we unloaded our cargo.
And then once we were unloaded, we went back to Yokohama.
And that was when they removed a screw members and put a Japanese crew aboard to ferry their people back from the islands back to the mainland.
And we came back to the states as passengers on another cargo ship.
I see.
That was coming back over here.
That's fascinating how you know we fought the war against the Japanese, but then once the war was over,
then we served in sort of helping them get back home as part of the occupation duty.
That's right.
Yeah, indeed.
Indeed, that is the case.
So you came back home and from the islands, March of 1946, and you went back to Hookstexis, right?
We went back to Hookstexis, and visited with my family for a while.
And then the draft board told me that they was going to draft me, then they were drafting at the age of 18.
And I just couldn't imagine getting drafted, you know.
So I beat them to it.
I went down and joined.
And we swore into the Air Force on August 3rd, 1946.
1946.
It was the Army Air Corps.
Army Air Corps.
Were the brown shoes back then, you know.
And it was not the Air Force until later on in 1947.
Why the Air Force?
Did you have initial designs on being a flyer or being in the air?
Really looking for maintenance or what were you looking for?
I was looking for a job in supply or something like that, you know.
Well, I went to the Army Air Corps route.
Right.
And I got in there and then it became a separate service and I received training in something else.
And then I pursued that, you know.
And indeed, 22 years you were in the Air Force and we'll talk about that career.
After basic, you were sent to Fort Scott or Scott Air Force Base in Illinois as a telephone lineman.
Yes.
Yeah.
Climbing poles, stringing the wires for it.
And it's a long way up those poles too.
It's a lot faster coming down and it is going up.
But you didn't have designs on climate poles.
No, I didn't.
When they called me in and said Alaska was my choice of a station to go to overseas.
You know, basic and tech training.
So I went to, was assigned to Alaska and they called me in.
And I told them that I was one of the best type to say they'd ever seen.
And that way I got into typing career.
And I knew that they'd have to have that typewriter in a warm place, you know, for it to operate.
Right.
And if you were to hear the typewriter, why was the operator?
I wanted to be warm.
And you told them you were an expert typewriter because you'd taken six weeks of typing.
I said, I had six weeks.
Well, I made you an expert.
And they didn't need pole climbers in Alaska.
No, they didn't need pole climbers.
They needed to clerk typists.
So you were clerk typists at the time it was lab Air Force Air Base in Alaska.
In Alaska.
Air banks in Alaska.
I see.
Which is Fort Wayne right up.
Fort Wayne right now.
To tell me now.
And the mission of that group up there was flying weather missions over the, tell us about that mission.
Well, it was, we flew between the lines and it was weather missions up over the North Pole.
And I have to leave the engines going long time to keep them from freezing up, you know.
Right.
Well, that was a very, very interesting too.
Now you've been married in 1946 in December of 1946.
And after a while that you were in Alaska, your wife, Marito, was able to join you there.
That's right.
Yes, that's right.
She came up and joined me and got a job working on the, on the base as, in the weather office as a, as a secretary.
I see.
And worked there for a couple of years, you know, or a year and a half to shoot was up there.
Matter of fact, we have a picture right now of, there is the, the young, Lee Roy and Marito.
And we were, we were 18 years old when that picture was taken.
Wow.
And we're still together.
How about that?
Well, 60 years, 1946, 62 years.
Or, or, or 64 years.
64 years.
Well, what a, what a wonderful story.
And then you were fortunate in that you were able to serve your entire 22 years just about the whole time with you all together because she was able to follow you from assignment to assignment.
We, I can't remember a time that we did not travel at the same time to another base, right?
In, in all the time that we were in.
Right.
To pick your Kansas Forbes Air Force Base and that's where you were, you were discharged in 1946 before you, you re-elisted.
August 3rd, 1946, I was discharged at Forbes Air Force Base in Topeka, Kansas.
And we came to Hooks and visited our families for a few days and went on to Montgomery, Alabama and re-enlisted in the Air Force at Maxwell Air Force Base.
Now, was that a decision that you all had already always made that you were going to re-enlist or was, or were you thinking about staying retired?
We were, we were, we left open both ways, you know.
We didn't know whether we would get work in civilian life or are staying the most there.
Right.
We enjoyed our first three years so we decided we'd try it again.
And we re-enlisted at Maxwell and from there on it was working on my 20 years.
Exactly, exactly.
Two, three years at Maxwell, wing inspector.
Uh-huh.
I was with the wing inspector's office and it was our responsibility to, to inspect organizations to make sure that they were operating under the proper orders and technical orders and so forth.
Right.
And that was, my job was to make sure all the technical orders were up to date and so forth like that.
Then your next assignment was Washington, DC and the Air Force Officers Program and Atomic Energy. What can you tell us about that?
Air Force Office for Atomic Energy, I worked for a civilian who has passed away now.
Dr. William D. Ernie, I worked for him.
And that was a job that lasted, I guess, about two or three years.
And we, I cannot go in detail on some of my...
That's what's called a special assignment.
Yeah, it's a special assignment.
You noted that in your 22 years service of the Air Force, you didn't, the majority of that, you actually were not on a military base, right?
And in my 22 years, I was, I was only on a naval force base for 10 years, for 10 years.
Right, right.
Including your last assignment here in Brian, which we'll talk about in a minute.
Left Washington in 1950 and then the Shreveport, Louisiana, which wasn't far from home in Hookstex, is it?
Very close to home.
I was assigned to...
Bozer Base as an administrative specialist and worked in the plant where we worked on the material that we were charged with.
And that lasted, like, four, five years, I guess.
Five years?
And then from Shreveport, Louisiana, to the Philippines.
To the Philippines.
And I noted that you didn't serve in combat, but you must have felt that way when you were flying to the Philippines.
Tell that story about the flight because you were with Marita and your two young children at the time.
I think you said Gary was nine and Debbie was five.
And talk about the flight to the Philippines.
Okay, we went by way of Hawaii.
And of course, our daughter got air sick in Hawaii and her mother had to take her in and clean her all up, you know.
We got closer to Guam, or was our next stop, and the plane was on fire.
And you could see a flame coming out of the engine.
And we were beginning to land.
And here come all of the ambulances and fire engines and so forth like that, you know.
And scared a bunch of people a little bit.
A little bit.
We got off that plane, got on another one, and started on into Guam.
And the plane lost an engine, and we had the jets and the fuel and come back into Guam.
This was the second plane.
It lost an engine.
Then we...
Did you think about taking a boat then?
We were looking closer at a boat.
Another motor transportation.
Yeah, it couldn't drive.
But we came in and they had a campus overnight.
Right.
And during the night, they fixed the original plane that we had come in on.
So the next morning we got back on that plane with all of our luggage and stuff.
We had to tow it around and we flew on into the Philippines and landed at Clark Air Base the next day.
Now you were assigned to the Air Act Shay office there, and it was really...
You didn't wear uniform in this position.
Talk a little bit about your job.
So that was interesting.
You were a lay-us-out between the US Air Force and the Philippines Air Force.
That's correct.
That was our job.
And again, my position was as the administrative supervisor for the Air Act Shay office.
And we started for a little over three years on that assignment.
And children became acquainted with what an embassy is.
A lot of people don't get that chance to serve in an embassy.
Right.
But they learned a lot.
And I think my son just commented the other day of how much he remembered about it.
Right. Right. Well, you went over there. He was 9, I guess you left.
He was 12, so he would remember a lot.
And even Debbie, as young as she was, she went over to college.
Debbie and I had lunch together today.
And she was telling me some of the things that she had remembered, such as the school building had been used as a prison for some of the people.
During the Japanese occupation.
Right. Right. Right.
You left the Philippines in, I guess, the late 50s, early 60s went to Dayton, Ohio for an assignment there with strategic air command.
Right. Right.
Right. Right. Right.
Patterson. Right. Patterson Air Force Base.
And we served there for a tour of duty.
And with the bomb squadron of B-52, KC-139.
I see. I see.
And then we left there and I came to school at Laxman Air Force Base for recruiting duty.
Right.
And they trained me to be a recruiter.
And then I served, we had six counties that we were responsible for.
Right. You were assigned to Brian.
But my duty station was here in Brian. That's where I lived.
And I think you said your office was actually in downtown Brian, where the federal building is now, in the post office.
Where the federal building, we were, we had the building downstairs.
Right.
And several times we've, you hear people running down the steps, you know,
and they'd come in and asked to be enlisted into the military.
Uh-huh.
Talk about, talk more about that duty because this was the time in the early 60s.
Vietnam was, was going then.
Lyndon Johnson was in office.
Vietnam was, was really the, the, the hot spot.
And you were here at a college town to talk about the, the challenges of recruiting there.
You said it was one of the most difficult jobs that, that you had because of the, the quotas you were required to.
It, it, it, it was a difficult job.
And, and a lot of the guys could not, could not take it, you know, a lot of pressure on somebody.
And, you know, you know, you were given a, a quota of, of, uh, what, we were responsible for nurses and, and, uh,
special type of, uh, women, women, air force.
Uh-huh.
You get a quota for a woman and, and, and, uh, they're not, they don't go in as much as the men do, you know.
Right.
And, uh, you know, you have to get, uh, to get to get to get your sign, uh, if, if you have a, a woman, or if you have a nurse or something like that, you know.
And, uh, but, uh, out of the, the three years that, that I was only recruiting due to, I was fortunate enough to be number three in Air Force, uh, all three years that I was, was going with.
Right.
Number three in the country.
So you were obviously pretty good at it.
And that being here in what, at, at that time was certainly a rural area.
You had a very rural, very rural and, uh, but, uh, when the draft is looking at you, you know, and it's, uh,
uh, had hips and makeup for their mind, uh, easier, you know, and, yeah, yeah.
I guess so, uh, you retired in 1968 from the service after 22 years.
Uh, you went to Lufkin for four years in the insurance business, but then you came back to Brian in February of 1972.
You took over as executive director of the Better Business Bureau and stayed there for 19 years.
And that was, uh, that was an interesting, interesting job, obviously.
Very interesting, uh, being a new, a new bureau.
Uh, I, uh, had heard about the job from, uh, the guy that run, uh, the Chamber of Commerce.
And, uh, I applied for the, for the job and was, uh, was hired to, uh, to, uh, be the executive director for the next 19 years, you know.
Right, right.
And the, the nature of the job was very similar to it.
It is now.
You were looking out for, for businesses and for the consumer and people that wanted to take your money for, for not good reasons.
And, uh, so it was essentially the, the same kind of thing that they're, they're doing now.
That's right.
They're still doing this and they'll be doing it next year.
In fact, I believe you told me that, uh, that you used to go on radio stations and TV stations and, and report about, uh, you know, people to look out for and, yeah.
And, and things like that.
You said that you'd even been in this studio before.
I was in this studio.
Uh, Mrs. Colson was that sharing Colson.
She still does.
I've been on her program.
The magazine show here at KAMU.
Yeah.
A long time ago.
Time goes by and, or you were hearing your capacity is, uh, with a better business bureau.
That's, uh, that's past, past, past, and you retired in 1989.
1989.
I know that you've been retired and, and I know you're very active now in the, uh, with the American Legion and, uh, and other groups and, and things like that.
So you and, you and, and, uh, you like you and, Maria, like to stay busy.
We do.
Uh, but we're beginning to slow down.
You know, after, uh, once you get in your age, you begin to slow down a little bit.
Right.
Talk about your family.
You all, you have a son, as we mentioned.
A son who is, is employed by the city of college station.
As the, he's superintendent of the roads and drainage, uh, of the city.
And, uh, then our daughter is a school teacher.
Mm-hmm.
And, uh, has retired once, but, uh, is back teaching again now.
So wonderful.
Wonderful.
I think you said you had four grandkids.
I have four grandchildren.
One of them, by the way, is, uh, a graduate of Texas A&M.
He's, uh, a mechanical engineer with, with NASA.
Wow.
Uh, we have, uh, another, our other grandson has got 14 years in the Air Force.
He's, uh, he's a career man.
And, uh, then I have a granddaughter that's a school teacher here.
She's that bilingual teacher, bilingual.
And then our other little granddaughter who is, uh, is a downs, lives, uh, a down home ranch in, in Elgin.
I see.
And, uh, that's my four grandchildren.
All of which you.
And then I got some great grandchildren.
I wish we had time to go into them, but, uh, when they grow up, we'll talk about their careers and all that.
Leroy, thank you very much for your service.
And thank you for, for being with us.
It's a fascinating career.
Pleasure.
We appreciate you.
Leroy Balmain's generation was one where service just came naturally, as did patriotism.
Leaving home and joining the military was just something that young kids did.
When you got out of high school in the 1940s, Leroy Balmain joined when he was 17 out of Hooks, Texas.
We salute him for his long service in the Air Force, in the infernarily two decades of his service to his community.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Be sure and join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
Thanks for watching.